Menopause Group -- answers to PS on User registration

Exercise 1

              Q. Define an SQL data model to represent users and user groups. Before proceeding to Exercise 2, discuss this data model with your
              teaching assistant.
	      A.  We have showed Dan Parker our .SQL file comprising.

Exercise 2

              Q. Build the basic user registration and login pages. Use HTTP cookies to make the rest of the semester's work easier. Start by
              sketching the page flow. 
              
	      A. Done as login.tcl and relogin.tcl and as admin/registration*.tcl
	      
              Q. What happens to a user who forgets his or her password? 
	      A. At their click, we email it in clear text to their email address.

Exercise 3
              admin/admin.tcl and  the edit_user_info.tcl scripts let the adminitrator change a user's status.
	      Current and historical statistics on user registration are visible in admin/admin.tcl by changing the calendar filtering.
              
	      Q: How can the administrator control who is permitted to register and use the site? What email notification options does
              the site administrator have that relate to user registration? 
	      A. the admin can email any user, from the admin page.

Exercise 4

              Q. Look at your tables again for referential integrity constraints and query performance.
	      A. We added many many named constraints, which are alrady useful in the server error log.
	      
	      Q. How long will it take to look up a user by email address? ORACLE is quite quick; we could speed it up with INDEX.
              Q. What if this email address is capitalized differently.
	      We use the upper function to do all comparisons.  We don't ahve 2 users with the same email address? 
              
	      Q. Many Web services contain content that can only be viewed by members of a specific user group. With your data model, how
              many table rows will the RDBMS have to examine to answer the question "Is User #541 a member of Group #90"? If the answer is
              "every row in a big table", i.e., a sequential scan, what kind of index could you add to speed up the query? 
	      A. We have to look at the group table and the user_group_map.  We haven't indexed the map on the pair user_id, group_id,
	        so ORACLE will do a sequential scan.

